-----------------------------------------------------------------------


                         Building Hercules

Copyright 2016 by Stephen R. Orso.  This work is licensed under the Creative
Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.  To view a copy of
this license, visit  http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/ or send
a letter to Creative Commons, PO Box 1866, Mountain View, CA 94042, USA.


To build Hercules from source, perform the following steps:

1. Ensure your computer has the required versions of the software
   packages needed to build Hercules.

2. Install any of the optional packages you wish to use with Hercules.

3. Obtain a copy of Hercules sources.

4. Build the recommended directory structure for a Hercules build

5. Obtain SoftFloat 3a For Hercules and build it using the instructions
   included with that package.  A pre-built set of binaries exists for
   Windows.

6. Obtain and build Hercules using the README specific to your
   platform.

Steps 4, 5, and 6 will can be performed by using the 1Stop shell script
or command included in the Hercules sources.  1Stop is described in the
host platform-specific readme file, README.BuildUNIX.txt or
README.BuildWIN.txt.

Please Note:  UNIX-like operating systems, including descendants of
AT&T System V UNIX, GNU/Linux, BSD, and OS/X, are collectively referred
in these readme files as "UNIX."  While The Open Group owns the
trademark to UNIX and has several pages describing how that trademark
may be used, it would be wise of The Open Group to remember two words:

   kleenex and ketchup.


REQUIRED SOFTWARE PACKAGES

   The required packages vary by host system type, UNIX or Windows.

   UNIX: You will need the packages required to configure, compile,
      link, and install a C application.  Either gcc or clang may be
      used.  You will also need automake, autoconf, and a few other
      utilities.  README.BuildUNIX provides details about the packages
      and versions required.  Most required packages are available with
      many UNIX distributions, but you may need to build from source to
      get the version you require.

   Windows: You will need Visual Studio 2015 Community Edition, an
      appropriate Windows Software Development Kit (SDK), a git client,
      and the file win32.mak from the Windows 7.1 SDK.  README.BuildWIN.txt
      hase specifics, URLs to obtain the needed software, and instructions
      for installing win32.mak.

   Both UNIX and Windows: You will need CMake to build Softfloat 3a For
      Hercules, and Windows builders will need it to build the PCRE
      package.  Version 3.2.0 or higher is required.


OPTIONAL SOFTWARE PACKAGES

   REXX interpreters (at least one is recommended)

     You must install a REXX interpreter if you plan to do any of the
     following:

       - Use runtest - to run one or more Hercules test scripts from
            the tests directory.
       - (UNIX) perform a "make check" after the build.
       - Use REXX program files in RC scripts, on the Hercules console,
            or in the configuration file.  All of these are described
            in chapter 14 of the Hercules - User Reference Guide for
            Version 4.00.

     If you are not sure, install one or both REXX interpreters if your
     host system does not have one of them installed already.  Your
     choices are:

     - ooRexx: Open Object REXX, an open source derivative of a subset
          of the IBM program product Object REXX.  Find it at:

          http://ooRexx.org

     - Regina Rexx, an open source REXX interpreter that may be found
          here:

          http://regina-rexx.sourceforge.net/index.html

     Source and installable executables are available for Windows and
     many UNIX distributions.

   Disk and Tape Compression Libraries (recommended)

     While disk and tape compression libraries are, strictly speaking,
     option, and Hercules will build and run correctly without them,
     may pre-built operating system distributions use compressed disks
     and tapes.

     To reduce storage requirements, emulated disk and tape volumes may
     compressed on the fly.  Compression has its own disk space versus
     system performance trade-off, and you are in the best position to
     decide whether to compress volumes.

     For file and volume interchange purposes, it is recommended that
     you instal both compression libraries and enable their use when
     building Hercules.  Even if you do not compress the volumes you
     use with Hercules, having the capability lets you work with a
     compressed voluem you may have received from someone else.

     Note that tape volume compression is specified in the HETINIT host
     command that creates the emulated tape, and the compression type,
     bzip2 or zlib, is specified in the Hercules command devinit or
     attach.  Disk volume compression is specified exclusively in the
     DASDINIT host command that initialized the emulated disk.

     Note also that a few of the test scripts specifically test
     compression, so a Hercules built without compression will cause
     those tests to fail.

     Either or both of of the following compression libraries can be
     used with Hercules.

     - zlib: Can be used by Hercules to compress both disk and tape
          volumes.  Available in the software repositories for many
          UNIX distributions.  Obtain source at:

          http://www.zlib.net

     - libbz2 Can be used by Hercules to compress both disk and tape
          volumes.  Available in the software repositories for many
          UNIX distributions.  Obtain source at:

          http://www.bzip.org/

   (Windows only) Perl Compatible Regular Expression Support

     If you are building on Windows and plan to use the Hercules
     Automated Operator (HAO) capability, you must install the PCRE
     package to provide regular expression support for HAO.

     On UNIX systems, the Hercules Automated Operator uses the regular
     expression support built into the host system.

     You can obtain PCRE here:

	     http://www.airesoft.co.uk/pcre

     Download version 8.20.

   Stand Alone Tool Kit (SATK)

     If you plan to develop Hercules further, SATK provides a very
     functional mainframe assembler that runs on your workstation.
     SATK generates object code in .core file format, which can be
     used when developing test cases for any changes you may make
     to Hercules.

     Find SATK and its documentation here:

        https://github.com/s390guy/satk

     SATK requires Python, which may be found here:

        https://www.python.org/


RECOMMENDED DIRECTORY STRUCTURE

   The following recommended directory structure is used for an
   out-of-source build for UNIX.  (Windows is built in-source, but
   all build activities are in directories separate from the Hercules
   source and distribution materials.)

   <topdir>/hyperion/             # Hyperion source (see Note 1.)
           /winbuild/             # Windows-only: support packages
           /SoftFloat-3a          # SoftFloat 3a For Hercules source
           /<arch>/hyperion/      # Hyperion build/install directory
           /<arch>/s3fh           # S3FH install dir
                                  # ..includes copyright notices
           /<arch>/s3fh/lib       # contains S3FH s3fhFloat.lib
           /<arch>/s3fh/include   # contains S3FH public headers
           /<arch>/s3fh.release   # S3FH Release build dir
           /<arch>/s3fh.debug     # S3FH Debug build dir

   Two notes for for UNIX users:
   1) If you wish to use a structure other than the above to store the
      packages required to build Hercules, use symbolic links to map
      your actual structure into the structure detailed above.
   2) If, after having built Hercules, you elect to move the directory
      structure, in other words, change <topdir>, delete the contents
      of the build directories and rebuild Hercules.  Configure
      populates the .deps directory of the build directory with full
      path names and does not change them if the directory moves.

   Windows users will need to turn the slashes the other way.

   The winbuild directory is the top of a tree containing three packages
   commonly available in UNIX but which must be installed for Hercules
   on Windows.

   <topdir> can be anything you wish, but Hercules is suggested.  This
   directory can be placed anywhere you have read-write permissions,
   consistent with common sense and the requirements of your host
   system.

   Replace <arch> as follows:
   - Windows: You must use the value of the %PROCESSOR-ARCHITECTURE%
     environment variable.  If you do not, you will need to follow
     the instructions in README.BuildWIN.txt to point the build process
     at the SoftFloat 3a For Hercules Library.
   - UNIX: It is recommended but not required to use the value returned
     by uname -m.

   Other directory structures might be used, but you are on your
   own.  The above structure is the supported structure.


BUILD SOFTFLOAT 3A FOR HERCULES

   Windows users who wish to avoid building SoftFloat 3a For Hercules
   may instead download an installable file containing binaries and
   public headers in the correct directory structure from here:

      https://github.com/hercules-390/SoftFloat-3a/releases/download/v1.0.1/SF3a4Herc.exe

   You can find source for SoftFloat 3a For Hercules here:

      https://github.com/hercules-390/SoftFloat-3a/releases/latest

   The document BUILDING.txt in that repository has detailed build
   instructions.

   To build SoftFloat on UNIX using the default directory structure and
   configuration options, change directory to the SoftFloat source
   directory and issue the command "1Stop".

   You only need to build SoftFloat 3a For Hercules once, even if you
   build Hercules multiple times.  A rebuild of SoftFloat 3a For
   Hercules is required only if you are recreating the entire build
   directory structure, are developing SoftFloat 3a For Hercules, or
   need an updated version of the package.

   Note that while SoftFloat 3a For Hercules is based on John Hauser's
   SoftFloat package, version 3a, it is not the same as that package.
   it has been modified as needed to implement the specifics of IBM's
   implementation of binary floating point arithmetic based on the
   IEEE 754 standard.  (Note that IBM implements elements of both the
   1985 and 2008 versions of IEEE 754.)


BUILD HERCULES FOR YOUR HOST PLATFORM

Instructions for this can be found in the following host platform
specific README files:

  For UNIX:

   README.BuildUNIX.txt - For all UNIX-like platforms, including OS/X

  For Windows:

   README.BuildWIN.txt - For all supported versions of Windows, both
      32-bit and 64-bit.

Rewritten by Stephen Orso, stephen.orso@yahoo.com, late 2016.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
